<h1><center>Any harm in looking at addiction a different way?</center></h1>

There is one main proposition held by most other physicians that I cannot accept. It is that the using of a drug is the main symptom of addiction and, consequently, that the goal is to stop drug use. This idea leads to a number of erroneous conclusions. First, that the use of different drugs or behaviors represents different diseases. Also coming from this common assumption is the idea that once the use stops for a prolonged period, the illness will be in remission. I've had many arguments with colleagues over this idea, and what amazes me most is not that they think these are the best conclusions to be drawn from the evidence, but that they think these are the conclusions they must follow because my own are not politically popular. They express a fear that if my conclusions were generally accepted, society would decrease its support for addiction medicine within the larger body of medicine. I was greatly surprised to find this out. I had assumed that the issue was one of facts and data. I was prepared to argue my point and was flabbergasted to hear answers such as, "yes but..."

"...if we say that, no one will ever accept addiction medicine as a specialty because there are no specialties based on a single disease."

"...if I tell Congress these are all the same thing, you can forget them taking heroin addiction seriously."

“… if we say that, then no one will ever come to our treatment program because no one will be willing to give up all their drugs at once.”

“...can you imagine what the insurance companies will say if we're treating for addiction and we list 'debting' as the drug of choice?"

"...that would change everything."

I sometimes get tired and want to give up. It would be a lot easier to just agree with everyone. But think of what happens when you make medical decisions based on politics rather than data. Can you imagine the outcome? Is there a line outside your senator's office of people looking for medical advice? And people don't make appointments with me to hear my political views either. I meet a lot of people who have been hurt by this political compromise. Many of them have stories of relatives who died of this disease because they got treatment based on what I believe are false premises. I have known some people who died when they might have lived if their doctors knew better.

Here's an example of what I mean. A man I treated had been drinking for over 20 years. Before seeing me he saw a psychiatrist who believed the drinking was the disease. With some help, the man stopped drinking. After the initial euphoria of freedom wore off, he started to feel the real symptoms of the disease. As he couldn't drink anymore, he had no way to feel better. His psychiatrist felt that since the man's "new" symptoms weren't caused by his drinking, they must represent “Major Depression,” and he started him on an anti-depressant that raises the serotonin level in the brain. As a boost of serotonin gives us a feeling of wellbeing, the patient responded and the psychiatrist felt he had made a good decision. As weeks went by the man noticed an almost imperceptible gradual worsening. He didn't enjoy things as much, couldn't think as clearly, couldn't remember as well, and started to eat more junk food and gain weight. Eventually he lost his interest in almost everything and was having cravings to drink again. His doctor felt this must represent breakthrough depression and raised the dose of the anti-depressant. It worked for a few weeks and then the man was feeling worse than ever.

What neither the doctor nor the patient knew is that high serotonin levels decrease the release of dopamine in the reward center . The man never had Major Depression; he was experiencing the unmasked symptoms of the disease of addiction. Giving the right treatment for depression eventually made the patient worse. As he didn't drink again, the psychiatrist didn't recognize worsening addiction. As the man eventually gained over 70 pounds, it's pretty clear he just switched drugs from alcohol to overeating, but as the psychiatrist was taught that being obese is a different disease from alcoholism, he couldn't see this. The psychiatrist chased his symptoms for a couple of years, switching anti-depressants and raising their doses. While I think participation in AA would have helped, the patient wasn't able to maintain his AA involvement, perhaps because the lowered dopamine made him irritable and unable to concentrate. When he eventually came to see me, I explained to him how I saw what happened. Just that explanation helped because he had believed that he was beyond help as he had had a good psychiatrist who prescribed good medicines that worked for a little while. He thought he would not be able to recover in AA because something was wrong with him that wasn't wrong with other alcoholics; he thought he just "couldn't get it." I started him on a medicine to raise dopamine tone, and he began to feel better. After some coaxing he went back to AA, and this time those other people weren't so annoying and hard to understand. We eventually tapered the serotonin antidepressant. He's done well since and eventually even gotten off the dopamine medicine as his participation in AA has, I think, given him enough dopamine receptors to feel better. This is not an unusual case. I see this all the time. It's a shame that the people who could have taught the man's psychiatrist a different view either didn't know themselves or were afraid to speak it. Compromise and politics have a role in life, a big one. But when we're dealing with a force of nature, like a disease that neither knows nor cares what we want, compromise has very little role.
