<h1><center>Can you get addiction even if you aren’t born with it?</center></h1>

Yes, I think you can. Let’s say that you are not born with the genetic types listed previously. Let’s say you’re born “normal.” When everyone else is experimenting with drugs, you try it and it may be somewhat enjoyable but not really all that much. There may be consequences or not, but let’s say there were some and you decide you really don’t think it’s worth it to keep using the drug. But you do think it’s important to keep your friends and they think it’s important to keep using the drug. So you put up with it. Remember the damage that’s done to the reward system when too much dopamine is released at one time. As that damage progresses you become lower and lower in your dopamine tone. It’s quite possible that eventually you can bring your brain to the level where you need the drug to feel normal.

Now this is society’s vision of how everyone gets addicted. In my experience very few people follow this path to addiction.

There is another, more common way to become addicted if you weren’t born that way. Of course how we get addicted doesn’t differ much for the person with the problem. There are certain stressors, especially certain social stressors that can lower the density of dopamine receptors on the cells of the Nucleus Accumbens. Remember that with fewer dopamine receptors we get a lower dopamine tone and a lower ability to feel reward. So someone born “normal” who is subjected to these social stresses may experience life the way someone would who was born with a dopamine receptors that didn’t work right. More on this later, but if you’re wondering what these stresses are, they are being alone and feeling less than others.
