<center><h1>Can’t we just block the dopamine?</h1></center>

Nice try. Sorry, that still wouldn’t work and anyone with addiction would be able to tell you why. If you just block a drug’s ability to work but leave the disease untreated, the disease will find another way to get what it needs. Besides, doctors have already tried it and it didn’t work. Rather than decrease the effectiveness of gambling to make someone high, a dopamine blocker actually made the subjects gamble even more.  This finding has the scientists confused, but anyone with addiction can tell you why. The medicine caused the baseline level of dopamine down even further, so they needed more gambling to get relief.

At first, and still to some extent, doctors thought a drug that blocked the enkephalin receptor would do the trick. And to a large extent it does, if the idea is to stop drug use. With the enkephalin blocker onboard, the compulsive use cycle doesn’t spike up as high or as fast so that some drugs don’t give enough reward to be useful. So people will generally stop using them. But remember, drug use is not the same as addiction. What we do in many cases is take someone who can use a drug and feel normal for a little while and make it impossible to make him feel normal at all.

A recent study shows that even when the enkephalin blocker works, it only works for people with a specific mutation of their enkephalin receptor. So there are some people who may have that specific mutation and not have a low dopamine that will benefit from such a blocker. But while they have compulsive drug use, it isn’t clear to me that when the dust settles we’ll still say that what’s wrong with these people is addiction.
