<h1><center>Does neurobiology also determine who likes which reward?</center></h1>

Yes, I believe so. Let’s take a look at a recent article published in the prestigious Journal of Addiction Medicine. Han, Lee, et al published a study<a name="ref20" href="#foot20">[20]</a> done on over 140 Korean male adolescents, about half of whom had what the authors called “Excessive Internet Game Play (EIGP).” What they found was that the boys with EIGP were more likely to have a mutation of one of their dopamine receptors that made it more difficult to see the dopamine signal. They also found that for the kids with EIGP, the dopamine receptor mutation was associated with a measure of reward dependence that sort of corresponds with the Cloninger Type II I told you about. Well, that makes sense from what I’ve told you so far.

What’s surprising is that the EIGP kids were also more likely to have a mutation of their enzyme that breaks down dopamine (COMT), leading to a higher dopamine spike with a reward. Well, that doesn’t make sense at first, but let’s think about it. Say you have low dopamine tone and you play a video game and get a normal person’s reward from it – well, no big deal. But if you got a better than normal reward from it because you also had the COMT mutation the game would be much more rewarding. In essence what the researchers found was that the dopamine receptor problem was the set up and the ability to have a bigger than normal release with such a little response was what made the kids respond to video games. Perhaps you don’t need that COMT mutation to respond to stronger stimulants, such as cocaine. This is an example where two problems pool together to make a specific reward more likely to be used.

You can look at the diagram on page 72 and think about other examples. What if your dopamine function is fine, but your enkephalin receptor is broken. You won’t feel normal levels of reward unless you have an opiate in your system. But maybe cocaine won’t work so well because your dopamine system is fine for now. Anything you can imagine that could go wrong in the diagram has probably been done in nature. In the future we’ll have the ability to look at the genes in this system so that we can more accurately pinpoint the treatment.

<a name="foot20" href="#ref20">[20]</a>: Han DH, Lee YS, et al. Dopamine Genes and Reward Dependence in Adolescents with Excessive Internet Video Game Play. JAM 1 (3), Sep 2007; 133-138.
