<h1><center>If this is Addiction, what’s Chemical Dependence?</center></h1>

For years and years the word dependence meant that if you stopped the substance you’d go into withdrawal. That’s a normal human thing. Everyone who takes an opiate or most sedatives everyday will, if they stop suddenly, go into withdrawal. That doesn’t mean they have addiction. In fact, most people will have withdrawal from some medications such as serotonin raising anti-depressants that no one would use to get high. Physical dependence has very little to do with addiction.

But addiction doesn’t sound very medical and neither does alcoholism. I’m sure that at some point the insurance companies told doctors, “We don’t pay for Communism or Judaism and we’re not paying for Alcoholism.” Well, doctors like to be paid, so they had to come up with another word. Unfortunately, they chose dependence, a word that already had a meaning. To confuse matters, they made withdrawal one of the symptoms of the new diagnosis Substance Dependence<a name="ref13" href="#foot13">[13]</a>. So, in essence, they took a word that meant something and said it means something else that the old word is potentially a part of. Could you understand that sentence the first three times you read it? Me either.

So you can see why this is so confusing. Look back at question 17 to understand the biology of withdrawal as it relates to the biology of addiction. If you are drinking alcohol or taking opiates, it will seem to you and all those around you that withdrawal is part of addiction. But if you’re using cocaine, you don’t get tolerance and withdrawal. If you are overeating or gambling, it’s not clear that you get withdrawal either. So you can probably see why I like the word addiction better than dependence. Substance Dependence makes it sound like the problem is the substance when in fact the problem is the brain. If you stop drinking alcohol but start overeating to get more dopamine, is that two illnesses? No, I don’t think so, but using the term Substance Dependence makes it sound like it is.

<a name="foot13" href="#ref13">[13]</a>: Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorder (Third Edition). American Psychiatric Association, Washington DC, 1980.
