<h1><center>If this is so biological, why should I to go to AA? (or the 12-step group of your choice)</center></h1>

It’s precisely because addiction is biological and permanent that a recovering addict should be involved in a 12-step program. One of my favorite studies answers for me why people with addiction benefit biologically from working a 12-step program. The study involves four normal infant monkeys. When offered cocaine these monkeys didn’t like it and wouldn’t continue using. Then the researchers took these young monkeys away from their mothers and put them in cages by themselves where they couldn’t see any other monkeys. Like us, monkeys are social primates and like company. Being alone was very stressful. When they did a brain PET scan, they found the monkeys had fewer dopamine receptors than they had before. That means that in spite of the normal level of dopamine the monkeys had, they could not feel the dopamine signal as much as before. Now that they had a lowered dopamine tone, these monkeys also started to like cocaine and used it avidly. So they raised these monkeys in cages by themselves using cocaine until they were old enough to go in with other monkeys.

When the monkeys got to the right age, all four were put in a large group cage, and, of course, being monkeys, the first thing they did was compete to find out who was the alpha male monkey. The winner was the big shot. He got more space, more food, and the others always backed off from him. So far that’s what you’d expect from monkeys, but here’s the kicker. The alpha male monkey stopped using cocaine, and when they PET scanned him, he had returned to a normal dopamine receptor density. The other three subservient monkeys continued to use cocaine and continued to have decreased dopamine receptor density.

So what do I learn from that study? That the stress of being alone and the stress of feeling less than someone else are the same stress to our primate brain; that they will both cause a decrease in dopamine receptor density; and that they will both cause the use of anything we have available to increase the dopamine reward signal. What do you get from 12-step programs? Two of the gifts of working a 12-step recovery program are that you come to know that you need never be alone again and that you aren’t any less than anyone else. I’ve seen this work very quickly too.

You’ll meet lots of people who say, “I knew when I walked into the meeting I was just going through the motions, and I was going to use when the meeting was over. But by the end of the meeting I was okay and I didn’t use.” You’ll also meet people who were shamed by others and almost immediately sensed that the joy had gone out of life and started craving. So I think our dopamine receptor density can move up and down fairly quickly, and it’s a biological change that I can’t produce with medicine.
