Preface

This book was inspired by my patients. It was their questions that prompted it and created it.
This book is not intended to be a complete treatment of the disease of addiction. It’s also not intended that you read it through from beginning to end. You can if you wish, of course, but you could also just take a look at the contents and pick a question that interests you. Some of the answers refer to information from previous questions and some will stand alone.
There are two main points to this book, so I’ll summarize them here. The first is that addiction, not alcoholism or cocaine dependence or compulsive gambling, is the disease that requires medical attention as opposed to any particular behavior patients or their families find troubling. The second is that addiction usually causes symptoms before the troubling behavior started and will continue to cause symptoms after the behavior stops. Putting those two points together has a number of implications, but most important is that people recovering from addiction should be in care for the illness regardless of whether they are using or not; the illness does not go away with the drugs. The new science that has emerged and continues to be discovered tells us that this brain disease is a chronic progressive condition that requires care throughout the life cycle much as does diabetes, asthma, and hypertension. For the past 50 years our focus has been on the drug and the behavior as evidenced by our legal efforts such as the “War Against Drugs.” These efforts have largely failed and addiction is, if anything, a bigger rather than smaller problem than it was 50 years ago. New science is showing us a better way to change our society by treating this disease as a disease and giving us, for the first time, effective biological tools. This is a hopeful time for the treatment of addiction, and that hope is what this book is about.
