<center><h1>What is Harm Reduction?</h1></center>

Sorry, this is a complicated answer, so you may need to read this part a couple of times. One of the problems is that my definition of harm reduction seems to be the exact opposite of most other people’s definition. I think you’ll like mine better, but first I’ll explain the other, more popular definition.

Harm reduction is basically any treatment aimed at reducing harm in the addict’s life short of stopping the drug and achieving abstinence. An example would be considered such things as a clean-needle programs, though I know some addiction medicine doctors who would call methadone, a treatment for addiction, a harm reduction because the person is still taking “a drug.” In this view treatment is not aided by medication and harm reduction is used to refer to interventions for the person who won’t stop. For most people who practice addiction medicine, this idea of harm reduction is looked at as a lower form of treatment, or a sort of secondary fall back position.

On the other hand I look at it backwards. I see the idea of abstinence as harm reduction. For me the disease is present whether the person is using or not. Using is not the important issue, and stopping isn’t the goal of treatment. Resolution of the original symptoms is the goal, and just achieving abstinence won’t get you there. As I said before, what you get when you make someone stop using is a miserable addict. So this emphasis on stopping the drug use looks like harm reduction to me. It isn’t treatment of the illness, but it does get rid of some of the harm the drug might cause (liver disease, etc).

Now for those of you who are jumping up and down right now swearing that I’ll roast in hell for such heresy let me remind you that I don’t advocate using drugs. I believe that the human brain with addiction can not choose what chemicals it needs when it thinks it needs it. I’m turning this “harm reduction” phrase on its head to make a point. The abstinence based “crowd” largely looks down its nose at the harm reduction folks. I’d just like them to see it from another angle.
In the end we all want the same things. We want people with addiction to be happy, joyous, and free. We want people to feel normal and engage in normal life without having to use short acting drugs that cause crashes and worsening of the illness. We all want the illness treated. I think we, as a professional field, just need a different idea about what that treatment entails.
