<center><h1>What is addiction?</h1></center>

Addiction is a primary, brain-based, largely genetic, behavioral illness that is chronic, progressive, incurable, and, in most cases, terminal. There are a lot of words in that sentence and most need some explaining.
“Primary”: This means that it’s an illness in and of itself. Most psychiatrists used to think that addiction was a manifestation of other illnesses or personality traits. If you had addiction, you needed treatment for depression, anxiety, or a personality disorder. In the last 15 years, it has become clear that addiction has its own biology and natural history. You don’t need to have any other diagnosis to explain addiction. Also, you don’t have to abuse drugs to create addiction. It can exist on its own.

“Brain-based”: This means that the biology of addiction is in the brain. While that might seem simple and easy to understand, it’s really quite a new idea. Addiction is a brain disorder, but the symptoms often seem to control or come from other areas of the body. But an alcoholic’s problem isn’t in his liver. An obese compulsive overeater doesn’t have a stomach problem. Consequently, before we knew about the biology of addiction, we used to focus on those areas in treatment. That gave us the idea that we can cure addiction in a compulsive overeater by stapling his stomach or treating an alcoholic with a medicine that makes him sick if he drinks.

“Largely genetic”: There’s an idea in science called variance. It means how much of an outcome is explained by a particular situation. So, with addiction, we would ask what amount of variance is explained by genetics. It turns out to be a pretty high number. Something on the order of 70% of the variance of who becomes an addict is explained by their genetic makeup. There are other factors as well.

“Chronic”: Most of American Medicine is focused on acute illnesses; those are illnesses that go away. Someone is well, then they get sick, then they get well again. That’s acute. Chronic is different. Chronic illness lingers; not all are incurable, but most are. Think of diabetes. You don’t cure it; you control it and learn to live with it. It’s the same with addiction. It’s not going away. The person doesn’t grow out of it, nor does it burn out. The solution isn’t to wait until it goes away. The solution is to learn a way to live with it. Some people reading this may be confused at this point. They may be thinking, “How can you have addiction if you don’t use drugs?” Addiction the disease doesn’t go away when the addiction behavior stops; the symptoms are still there. The symptoms are what lead to relapse of the addiction behavior unless the addicted person finds another way to live that keeps the symptoms in check.

“Progressive”: This means that addicts get worse over time, not better. Progressive doesn’t mean there’s no hope, and it doesn’t mean the addict has to use. What becomes worse are the untreated symptoms of the illness. Without treatment and recovery things don’t go well, but we have treatment and recovery that provides an excellent prognosis and can provide a daily arrest of the symptoms.

“Incurable”: There is no cure for addiction--no shot or medicine that will make it go away. Again, like diabetes, we don’t aim for a cure but for a way to live with the presence of the disease without letting the disease ruin the patient’s life. In diabetes our goal is to return blood sugar levels to normal so that the extra sugar doesn’t damage the patient’s health. In addiction, we seek a remission of the symptoms so that the person with addiction does not seek out drugs or other behaviors to fix the symptoms himself.

“Terminal”: In most cases the end result of addiction, if left untreated, is death, again like diabetes. In the end, there are many ways to die of addiction: suicide, poisoning, overdose, homicide, trauma, and many others. But in the final analysis, it is the illness of addiction that leads to death. Even if the people with addiction manage to never use their drug or behavior of choice again, without treatment the symptoms of the disease will worsen, and they will eventually not want to go on living.

So, putting all that together, what is addiction? It’s just one more serious illness that we, as a society, have to learn to live with. It’s not drug use. If it were the solution would be easy: tie addicts to the bed and they don’t use drugs. If you do that you haven’t solved anything. What you have is the untreated disease of addiction and a miserable person who doesn’t feel good and can’t function. Like every other human being on the planet, they want to feel normal. Their brains remember what made them feel normal, and they’ll be going to get it as soon as you let them up unless, of course, another solution is available.
