<h1><center>What are the medications used in Addiction?</center></h1>

GABA Receptor Agents: There are two reasons for using a medicine that turns on the GABA receptor. The first is to make withdrawal from sedatives and alcohol easier. The second is to get a special effect on the dopamine spike.

For withdrawal, we use the drugs that were originally designed to combat epileptic seizures. I’ll call them Anti-epilepsy Drugs (AEDs). There are several AEDs and most are equally as good in making sedative withdrawal better, but the one I like the best for that purpose is valproic acid, sometimes called valproate. Many of the newer medications have to have the dosage slowly built up over time, so it doesn’t do much good if you’re in withdrawal. With valproate we can start the full dose in the first day and get some relief. Another one that works fast and is therefore good for withdrawal is a medicine called carbamazepine.

The other reason to use an agent that acts positively at the GABA receptor is to use one that specifically turns on a particular type of GABA receptor called GABAb. Under the influence of GABAb the dopamine spike from a drug is not as high and the resulting crash is not as low. It can help someone who is trying to stop using from using as much as they had been. There’s no guarantee with it, but it’s a useful technique. The AEDs are good for this GABAb effect as well as an old muscle relaxant called baclofen. We don’t need to use this as much as we used to now that acamprosate is available in this country (see glutamate agents below).

Dopamine Agents: If the problem is that there is not enough dopamine tone and because of that normally rewarding things are not rewarding, we can raise the dopamine tone. Hopefully then the person can feel reward from normally rewarding events and not have to look for external rewards to get to a normal level. There are a few ways to do this. My favorite is to block the reuptake of dopamine with a drug called buproprion, but only the long acting version. Another is to stimulate the release of dopamine with a new drug called varenicline. Varenicline works at the nicotine receptor to release dopamine. It’s been approved by the FDA to help people stop smoking and it’s pretty new.

There are a couple of other medications that other doctors use that I have not found helpful in the long run in treating people with addiction. The first is amphetamines, and the second is a drug called modafinil. Amphetamines are dangerous because they don’t just block the reuptake of dopamine, they run the reuptake pump in reverse. At first it was thought that modafinil worked like buproprion, and only blocked the reuptake of dopamine. But I’ve had a couple of patients report it felt and acted more like an amphetamine, so I’ve stopped using it.

Glutamate Modulators: A new medication called acamprosate works to block the glutamate-triggered craving that comes in response to sensory cues that remind the person of previous drug use. The glutamate signal is normally released in the reward center and serves to get the compulsive use cycle spinning. Because each dopamine spike is followed by a crash, this spinning leads to the craving one normally feels during the dopamine crash. With acamprosate blocking the glutamate signal, the reward circuit doesn’t spin up as much, and there is less chance of craving.
I’ve also noticed that it helps with what we used to call “denial” and now call “pre-contemplation.” I think the denial is caused by an overflow of the brain’s opioids into the area that remembers emotions, and under the influence of this overflow the person cannot remember how bad it was to use. As the acamprosate tunes down the glutamate signal, the reward system doesn’t get spun up. So, instead of the brain’s opioids flooding the area and causing “denial,” acamprosate keeps the opioid flood from happening. It’s been very helpful and low in side effects.

Since using acamprosate, I have not had the need to use a GABAb agent much other than for withdrawal. The GABAb effect must have been lowering glutamate but maybe not as directly because acamprosate seems to work better than the AEDs on the issue of denial.
Opioid Receptor Agents: A lot of doctors block the opioid receptor, which makes sense if you want to stop drug use. It doesn’t make as much sense if you’re treating what was wrong with the person before they started using drugs to feel better. The medication to block the opiate receptor is called naltrexone, and it has recently been released as a once a month shot for people who have had trouble maintaining abstinence.

A new drug called buprenorphine has been approved by the DEA and the FDA to treat opioid addiction. It gets on the opioid receptor and turns it on just enough to feel normal and not high. My patients have had a great deal of success with it. Buprenorphine can only be started once all the opioid the person has been using is out of his system, so it’s a difficult drug to get on especially if the patient has been using methadone or another long acting opioid. But patients are on it they generally do very well.
