<center><h1>What’s an addicting drug?</h1></center>

We must make a distinction here: the difference between a drug that can cause addiction and one that an addict will want to use. I make that distinction because I think that most people with addiction don’t need to have it caused. They had the biology and then found a drug that made them feel normal. That’s very different than the drug causing the problem.

So, a drug or behavior that an addict will use to feel better is anything that raises their dopamine high enough to be close to normal. The brain doesn’t care if it’s heroin in the vein or a box of chocolate cookies. All it sees is the dopamine. The drug will have to work fast enough to become associated with the dopamine rise or it won’t get used again, and it will have to raise the dopamine up sufficiently to have an effect. Not all drugs or behaviors will do this for all people, so you find some who like one drug or behavior while others use a different one to treat their symptoms.

What is a drug that can cause addiction? That would be one, like those mentioned above, that raises dopamine fast enough and high enough to be of use to the addicted individual but also so high that it’s too much of a signal. In that event the brain compensates by decreasing the number of dopamine receptors or maybe some of the VTA cells will die, sort of like a fuse has to blow when lightning hits your house. With the loss of dopamine signal, the problem gets worse. I can imagine someone who is not addicted and who uses for another reason (peer pressure, for instance) who causes damage with each use. Eventually, the dopamine level is low enough that he needs to use to feel normal. Again, I must emphasize that this scenario only accounts for about 20% of the addicts I meet. Most addicts can clearly remember having symptoms of addiction their entire lives.
