<center><h1>When did doctors realize addiction is a disease?</h1></center>

Most of this history comes from “Slaying the Dragon,”<a name="ref2" href="#foot2">[2]</a> an excellent book by William White on the history of addiction and its treatment. In 1873, Dr. Charles Hewitt of the Minnesota Board of Health called on the State of Minnesota to declare that “inebriation is a disease; that it demands the same public facilities for its treatment as other diseases.” (p.199) And there it stood for many years. Many hospitals for the care of the “inebriate” were erected. After the turn of the 20th century, the idea of a disease was actually lost a bit in the furor over prohibition. A few physicians still treated the illness, and some of them were helpful to the founders of Alcoholics Anonymous. In 1937, a group called the Research Council on Problems of Alcohol was founded that proposed research on alcoholism as a disease comparable to “tuberculosis, poliomyelitis, cancer, and other major diseases.” In 1956, the American Medical Association (AMA) established a committee on alcoholism and stated that alcoholism is “an illness which should have the attention of a physician.”

So, you can see that the idea of addiction as a disease is not a new one. Even as medical professionals learned in school that addiction is a treatable disease, many didn’t believe it. They couldn’t see it under the microscope or dissect it in the anatomy lab. If there isn’t a test for it, it doesn’t exist. So, for many doctors, the time of realization is still happening.

<a name="foot2" href="#ref2">[2]</a>: William L. White. Slaying the Dragon: The History of Addiction Treatment and Recovery in America, (1998) Chestnut Health Systems / Lighthouse Institute, ISBN 0-938475-07-X.
